[SOUND]
Let's
briefly talk about the history of HTML.
Its usually the case that
the history of any technology
is not particularly interesting or
exciting and
I can't claim that the history of
HTML is that interesting either.
But there are certain parts of this
history that not only give you
an understanding of how this
technology was developed, but
also gives you an appreciation
of certain aspects of HTML
that are still relevant and
applicable today.
So before 1997,
there were no community standards, so
browsers basically did
whatever they wanted.
They invented new tags.
They implemented the same
tags differently.
I was kind of the wild west of the web.
And you could go to a website and
end up being told that your browser is not
compatible with this website so you have
to go get a different browser in order
to even view the website to begin with.
Now around 1997 the World Wide
Web Consortium, the W3C, came up
with the first standard browsers actually
started to pay somewhat attention to,
which is HTML4 and
they very quickly updated it to HTML4.01.
That standard was, pretty loose,
and, the browser's had, still had,
way too much leeway inside that standard,
as to how they implemented it, and
how pages we're being rendered.
So, around 2000, the W3C came up
with another specification called
XHTML 1.0 and
that specification was based on XML.
And XML is a very rigid but
very clear markup language.
In W3C wanted to kind of pick that up and
keep going, with it and produce XHTML 2.0.
The problem is that the browser vendors
which at this point already had
a history of not really listening a 100%
to any standard, they decided that
this whole W3C thing is moving way
too slowly, and on top of that,
they felt that the specifications
are really moving in the wrong direction.
So the browsers banded together, the
browser vendors banded together and they
created yet another group that produced
specifications that was called WHATWG.
And WHATWG, that's yet
another abbreviation because
we don't have enough of them.
So that group is called WHATWG and
it stands for Web Hypertext
Application Technology Group.
So it's a bunch of browser
vendors that got together.
And this group is much less
democratic than the W3C.
In other words they have one central, one
editor that makes the final decisions so
all the browser vendor representatives
can argue all they want but
at the end the appointed one editor
that kind of makes the final decisions.
And they're the ones that
are driving the entire HTML5,
what we have now,
they're the drivers behind it.
So for a long time the two organizations
didn't really see eye to eye much at all
and they didn't work together, so
they were really going to
two different directions.
But I think W3C eventually realized
that hey, you know, that organization is
actually being driven by the people and
by the companies that actually matter.
Because they are the guys who
are developing the browsers themselves,
so maybe it's a good idea
to kind of make peace and
try to see if we can
work together somehow.
And this is what happened around 2007,
2009 time frame.
So WHATWG and W3C started sort
of kind of working together.
And what they produced in the end
is what we have now, HTML5.
So what does any of that matter to you?
Well what matters now is that there are
two organizations out there, one is called
W3C and the other one is WHATWG and
they're both in charge of HTML somewhat.
So it could be that you
could get into a situation,
it's certainly possible that a browser
potentially can be compliant
with a specification which isn't yet
even formalized by the official W3C.
So, it makes your head spin a little bit,
doesn't it?
So the way they divided it up is
that W3C is going to be in charge of
the standards since this is what their
bread and butter is, its standards.
And they are going to be in
charge of the HTML5 standard.
And WHATWG is not even going to give
a version to their HTML standard,
they're just going to say it's HTML and
it's constantly evolving.
There is no version.
We never stop.
We keep evolving it.
And that WHATWG, they're the ones
that really implement the browsers.
So what W3C does is it kind of cherry
picks some of the more successful
things that are actually kind of start
to be implemented by the browsers and
they slowly bring it into
the official standard.
So the point of this history,
this quick history lesson,
is that this whole thing
is a bit of a muddy waters.
And it's kind of hard
to keep track of well,
what is the browser supposed
to be compliant with?
But unfortunately it is our job as
developers to keep track of these
capabilities.
And it's particularly important
nowadays because all the major modern
browsers are all evergreen browsers.
And what that means is is that
they silently update themselves
on the users computer.
So you no longer even
need to have the user
acknowledge the fact
that they want to update.
That means that,
which is a good thing actually, right.
Because now every browser is kind of
patched as much as they can be patched for
security reasons.
And also it kind of automatically
without the user intervention
gets the latest greatest features of HTML5
and all of the browser software itself.
But every major browser Chrome,
Firefox, Safari, Internet Explorer,
they all are evergreen browsers, so
they update themselves automatically.
So what I would like to do now is
give you a few resources on the web
that will make this job keeping track
of these changes a little bit easier.
The first resource that I
really should share is the W3C.
The W3C HTML5 standard, and this is
a very academic type of reading but
you can still look stuff up in
it that is somewhat useful.
And certainly if you want to kind of
know what the actual standard is that
everybody agreed to,
this is a great document to start with.
Another excellent site that you
should definitely check out, and
kind of keep in your
arsenal is caniuse.com.
And this is a site that basically
itself keeps track of HTML5 standards,
SVG standards, CSS standards,
JavaScript APIs and on, and on, and
on in the web space to be able to
tell you which browser supports what.
So, for example if I search for
Srcset, which is a pretty new attribute
that is going to hopefully
come soon to the image tags.
Which we'll talk about it later.
But you can take a look and
see if when I type Srcset that it will
tell you well this is an attribute.
It will also tell you which browsers at
this point is supported and which ones,
like IE, do not.
And you can yourself take a look at and
see whether or not something that
a browser let's say you're not
really targeting, you're not really,
don't care so much about, if it doesn't
support it, doesn't support it fully,
you can make the decision whether or not
you want to use that particular feature.
Another great resource
to find out whether or
not your HTML actually is going to work
in browsers is to use a validator and
there's a great validator
provided by the W3.org website.
And you can basically cut and paste
all of your website straight here, or
you could upload a particular HTML file,
or at this point you could even copy and
paste your HTML straight in here and
check whether or not it's valid.
And if it is valid chances are,
very high chances are,
that it will work very
well in the browser.
So let's take a look and
see let's tested out and
see if we could validate the W3C's
own page and if we'd click check and
sure enough it tells us that it
is valid or everything is green.
Now when you write webpages in the real
world, you can't always say that I'm just
going to go ahead and try to support
every browser that exists in the entire
webisphere, and that's not going to work
because there's just so many of them and
some of them are so outdated.
So it's always a good idea to check
the browser statistics and to see.
Certainly if you are in an organization
that you know all the browsers
that are in that organization
that are being used,
all the browsers and
browser versions, that helps.
But if you're writing an application for
the entire web, it's good to know which
browsers are actually popular, and
which browsers are basically
falling off the edge.
And if you take a look here,
this is a website, w3schools.com,
gives you the browser statistics, and if
you take a look here in September of 2015,
Chrome was basically
crushing it's competition.
And you can see the next one is almost
three times less market share than Chrome.
And you can tell that 65,
66 almost percent of users on
the web are using Chrome so
that seems like a pretty important browser
to make sure that your webpage works in.
And if you're all the way
at 1.4% of market share.
If there some feature that you really,
really want to implement and
all the other browsers implemented but
one of them that has such a little, such
little market share, doesn't implement.
Well, you might want to
decide to go with it anyway.
This is something that you
can make a decision about.
And last, but not least,
is Google.com or any other, really,
search engine that you would like to use.
I don't think there's a day that
goes by that, in web development,
that you don't have to look
something up on the web.
And this is just part of
the day-to-day business.
And if you're going to be in web
development, you kind of have to get
used to the fact that you have
to constantly look things up.
Things are constantly changing,
and obviously,
no human being can know
it all by themselves.
So to summarize, we went over somewhat
relevant, hopefully, history of HTML,
and kind of saw how it effects
us as developers, even today.
So I gave you some resources for
validation of HTML.
Which kind of gives you a little bit more
of a comfort factor that your HTML
will work in browsers properly.
And I gave you some resources for
feature investigation like the website of
canIuse.com which lets you know whether or
not a particular feature is implemented
in a particular version of a browser.
And we also went over where you
could look up browser statistics so
you can make an informed decision of
what browsers you should even target for
your web application to begin with.
Next we're going to talk about
the anatomy of an HTML tag.
We'll take it apart and see what an HTML
tag is and how to properly code it.